(a) What is meant by P and NP Problems? Explain P = NP

 P problems
– (The original definition) Problems that can be solved by deterministic Turing machine 
in polynomial-time.
– (A equivalent definition) Problems that are solvable in polynomial time. 

• NP problems
– (The original definition) Problems that can be solved by non-deterministic Turing 
machine in polynomial-time.
– (A equivalent definition) Problems that are verifiable in polynomial time.
• Given a solution, there is a polynomial-time algorithm to tell if this solution is 
correct.


P = NP means whether an NP problem can belong to class P problem. In other words, whether every 
problem whose solution can be verified by a computer in polynomial time can also be solved by a computer in polynomial time


(b) Why it is important to find approximate solutions for NP Complete Problems?
If a problem is NP-complete, there is very likely no polynomial-time algorithm to find an 
optimal solution. The idea of approximation algorithms is to develop polynomial-time 
algorithms to find a near optimal solution.


(h) All NP-hard problems are also NP-complete or not? If no then what is the difference?
a. All NP-hard problems are not NP-complete. NP-complete are least hard problems of 
NP-hard. All NP-complete problems can be verified in polynomial time but all NPhard problems cannot.


(i) Give one example of P and NP problem. 
a. Finding if given number is prime because solution can be obtained and verified in 
polynomial time.
But detecting hamiltonian cycle / solving sudoku game cannot be 
solved in polyomial time but can be verified in polynomial time so they are NP 
problems


(j) If one problem can be solved in polynomial time by non-deterministic algorithm and 
can be verified in polynomial time by deterministic algorithm then in which class this 
problem lies?
a. It is NP problem


b) A problem that is solvable in time complexity of 𝑇(𝑛) = 3 ∗ 𝑛^𝑛 and space complexity of 𝑆(𝑛) = 𝑛^2
and it can be validated in 𝑇(𝑛) = 2^𝑛
time. Is it a NP-Complete or NP-Hard?

B) NP-Hard as validated in 𝑇(𝑛) = 2^𝑛 time.
(j) Can a problem be both NP and P ? Why or why not ?
Yes because P is a subset of NP.


b) Let X be a problem that belongs to the class NP. Then explain why the following are
 incorrect or correct statements?
A. Explain why it is incorrect) There is no polynomial time algorithm for X
B. (Explain why it is incorrect) If X can be solved deterministically in polynomial 
time then P = NP
C. (Explain why it is correct) If X is NP-hard, then it is NP-complete
D. (Explain why it is incorrect) X may be undecidable
• Sol: 
(A) is incorrect because set NP includes both P( Polynomial time solvable) and NP-Complete 
(B) is incorrect because X may belong to P (same reason as (A)) 
(C) is correct because NPComplete set is intersection of NP and NP-Hard sets. 
(D) is incorrect because all NP problems are decidable in finite set of operations.

c) Does P ! = NP mean that no problem exists which can be solved and checked in polynomial
time?
No. P != NP means that P is a proper subset of NP. That means, there are problems that are in NP 
but not in P.

(f) Suppose there is a maximization problem, where the approximate solution has the cost of 
25 And optimal solution has the cost of 30. Find the approximation ratio. 
30/25 = 1.2 approximation ratio


(c) Explain the difference between greedy algorithms and dynamic programming [2 Points]

Greedy Algorithms: A greedy algorithm is a mathematical process that looks for 
simple and easy-to-implement solutions to complex, multi-step problems by 
deciding which next step will provide the most obvious benefit.

Dynamic Programming: It is often used to solve optimization problems. Its is a 
tabular method in which we break down the problem into subproblems and place 
the solution to the subproblems in a matrix


e) In which conditions dynamic programing does not work. Give suitable example.
Basic property of problems which can be solved using DP are.
1. Overlapping Sub-problems.
2. 2.Optimal Sub-structure
If any problem doesn't have either of above property then problem can't be solved 
using DP. for example shortest path can be solved using DP but longest path can't 
solved, because longest path doesn't hold optimal sub-structure property


(a) What do you mean by complexity of an algorithm?
a. In computer science, the complexity of an algorithm is a way to classify how 
efficient an algorithm is, compared to alternative ones. We determine efficiency 
by space and time complexity.


Write any one difference between divide & conquer approach and Dynamic 
Programming?
a. In dynamic programming, we have overlapping sub-problems where results are not 
re-computed but rather stored while in divide and conquer, this is not the case.

(d) Write down any one real life application of Maximum sub-array.
a. In computer vision, maximum-subarray algorithms are used on bitmap images to 
detect the brightest area in an image

(e) When does the worst case of quick sort occur?
a. The worst case occurs when the picked pivot is always an extreme (smallest or 
largest) element. This happens when input array is sorted or reverse sorted and 
either first or last element is picked as pivot.



a) Write any two real life applications of the set cover problem
• Selecting small number of sentences to tune all features in speech recognition
• Selecting small number of telescope snapshots to capture light from all galaxies in 
the night sky

(b) If a problem does not have overlapping sub-problems, then dynamic programming 
approach works better than divide and conquer. True or False? Also briefly explain.
• False. Dynamic programming works better when there are overlapping 
subproblems.

(d) Discuss any two real life applications of the closest pair problem.
• Collision avoidance
• Clustering

(e) Suppose you want to lay pipelines in a building such that minimum pipe and other 
materials are consumed covering every desired location. Which technique from 
algorithms course will you employ and why? 
• Greedy technique (Minimum spanning tree)



(j) What are the limitations of Greedy Algorithms?
(j) Stuck in local minima.








